README.md, before:

# What is the Power BI Model Catalog?
The Model Catalog is a user-facing set of documentation derived from the metadata of a published Power BI model.

The purpose is to drive self-service adoption of Power BI models by allowing end users to understand a semantic model, providing easy access to table and measure descriptions, formulas, relationships, and more.

# Prerequisites
* Your Power BI semantic model must be published in a Premium Power BI/Fabric workspace (P1/F64+ or PPU)
* The XMLA endpoint must be enabled (Read only)
* You must have a current version of Power BI Desktop
Note: If you use the MultiModel_SingleWorkspace or MultiModel_MultiWorkspace versions, you MUST set the option to ignore sensitivity labels.  (Only for this particular documentation model, you do NOT need to disable this across your tenant.)

# Which Files do I Need?
The easiest way to use the catalog with your own semantic model is to download this Power BI template file: 
There are 3 different files, depending on your situation:
[SingleModel.pbit](SingleModel.pbit) - this takes paramters for a single workspace, and single model.
[MultiModel_SingleWorkspace.pbit](MultiModel_SingleWorkspace.pbit) - this takes paramters for a single workspace, and a comma-separates list of models.
[MultiModel_MultiWorkspace.pbit](MultiModel_MultiWorkspace.pbit) - this requires the user to manually enter a table, that has records for worksapce and model name, one per row.  

Open the template in Power BI Desktop, update workspace(s) and model(s), and you will be in business.

If you want to contribute to this project, create a branch and pull request here in GitHub (approval required for PR).

# What does the Model Catalog Do?
* Queries the metadata of a Power BI model published in a Premium or PPU workspace
* Provides a templated, parameterized report for quick and easy deployment

![Collage of 10 pages from Model Catalog](/images/modelcatalogreport.jpg)

# Extracting Descriptions – Internal Model Documentation
The model catalog extracts descriptions from many Power BI objects: tables, measures, columns, calculation groups, calculation items, hierarchies, security roles, and the model itself.

![Measure description](/images/measuredescription.jpg)

Note that measure descriptions can now be created with Copilot (preview feature)!

# Model Metadata Included in the Model Catalog
* Model name and description
* Tables
* Partitions, including source queries
* Measures, including descriptions and DAX expressions
* Columns
* Hierarchies
* Relationships
* Calculation Groups and Calculation Items
* Security Roles

# Adding Hidden Descriptions
As of October 2024, the model name, model description, and calculation item descriptions can't be modified directly in Power BI Desktop. They can be updated very easily through Tabular Editor, though. 

![Updating model name and description in Tabular Editor](/images/modelname.jpg)

# Tagging Table Types
The model catalog introduces the concept of filtering by table type
Table type is assigned using a tag in each table description, using the notation: %%TableType
The tag must come AFTER the table description

![Table type tag](/images/tabletag.jpg)

_Note that the table types of “%%Fact” and “%%Dimension” are required for a diagram visual in the model catalog.
You can also use any additional types that you would like to use for filtering (e.g. %%Utility, %%CalculationGroup, %%Parameter, %%Other, etc.)_

# Connecting the Catalog to Your Published Model
The model catalog uses an Analysis Services connection, and is parameterized to make it easy to connect to any published Power BI model.
Note: The Semantic Model parameter can be a comma-separated list of models within the same workspace.

![Parameters dialog](/images/pbitparameters.jpg)

![Parameters dialog](/images/parameters.jpg)

To find your workspace connection, look under Workspace Settings --> License info in the Power BI service.

![Workspace settings](/images/workspacesettings.jpg)

You are connecting to a published Power BI model, so be sure to log in using your Microsoft account.

![Microsoft account login option](/images/microsoftaccount.png)

# Approve Native Database Queries
The model catalog uses DAX queries to retrieve data from a published semantic model. When connecting to a published model for the first time, hit “Run” several times to approve each query.

![Native query dialog](/images/nativequery.jpg)

Alternatively, you can temporarily disable Power BI Desktop's requirement for approvals of native database queries.

![Security option](/images/securityoption.jpg)

# Refreshing a published Model Catalog
The SingleModel version of the Model Catalog will only refresh when a schedule has been set up in the service or it is triggered manually or through the API. When setting up a refresh schedule, use oAuth credentials to connect to the data source (the target published model).
Both of the MultiModel options will not auto refresh (at the current time.)  To refresh them, you must download the file, refresh it locally, and republish.  This is becuase of the way PowerBI validates connections for PowerQuery.

Commit message:

Official release of notebook/lakehouse options

README.md, after:

# What is the Power BI Model Catalog?
The Model Catalog is a user-facing set of documentation derived from the metadata of a published Power BI model.

The purpose is to drive self-service adoption of Power BI models by allowing end users to understand a semantic model, providing easy access to table and measure descriptions, formulas, relationships, and more.

# Prerequisites
* Your Power BI semantic model must be published in a Premium Power BI/Fabric workspace (P1/F64+ or PPU)
* The XMLA endpoint must be enabled (Read only)
* You must have a current version of Power BI Desktop
Note: If you use the MultiModel_SingleWorkspace or MultiModel_MultiWorkspace versions, you MUST set the option to ignore sensitivity labels.  (Only for this particular documentation model, you do NOT need to disable this across your tenant.)

# Which Files do I Need?
The easiest way to use the catalog with your own semantic model is to download the file(s) that match your situation: 
There are 3 different files, depending on your situation:
SingleModel - This is the simplest method. It only documents one model. It can be refreshed.
MultiModel_SingleWorkspace - This allows for documenting multiple models, as long as they reside in a single workspace.  This method cannot be refreshed in the Service, it must be refreshed/republished in Desktop.
MultiModel_MultiWorkspace - This allows for documenting multiple models, regradelss of what workspaces they are in.  This method cannot be refreshed in the Service, it must be refreshed/republished in Desktop.
FabricNotebook - This option uses a Fabric noteook and Lakehouse to extract and store the data.  This means that it can be refreshed in the service.  This requires a Fabric-enabled workspace and capacity

Each folder has a template file, a notebook (if needed) and an instruction file.  Download the required files for your situation, and follow the directions in the Instructions file.


If you want to contribute to this project, create a branch and pull request here in GitHub (approval required for PR).

# What does the Model Catalog Do?
* Queries the metadata of a Power BI model published in a Premium or PPU workspace
* Provides a templated, parameterized report for quick and easy deployment

![Collage of 10 pages from Model Catalog](/images/modelcatalogreport.jpg)

# Extracting Descriptions – Internal Model Documentation
The model catalog extracts descriptions from many Power BI objects: tables, measures, columns, calculation groups, calculation items, hierarchies, security roles, and the model itself.

![Measure description](/images/measuredescription.jpg)

Note that measure descriptions can now be created with Copilot (preview feature)!

# Model Metadata Included in the Model Catalog
* Model name and description
* Tables
* Partitions, including source queries
* Measures, including descriptions and DAX expressions
* Columns
* Hierarchies
* Relationships
* Calculation Groups and Calculation Items
* Security Roles

# Adding Hidden Descriptions
As of October 2024, the model name, model description, and calculation item descriptions can't be modified directly in Power BI Desktop. They can be updated very easily through Tabular Editor, though. 

![Updating model name and description in Tabular Editor](/images/modelname.jpg)

# Tagging Table Types
The model catalog introduces the concept of filtering by table type
Table type is assigned using a tag in each table description, using the notation: %%TableType
The tag must come AFTER the table description

![Table type tag](/images/tabletag.jpg)

_Note that the table types of “%%Fact” and “%%Dimension” are required for a diagram visual in the model catalog.
You can also use any additional types that you would like to use for filtering (e.g. %%Utility, %%CalculationGroup, %%Parameter, %%Other, etc.)_

# Connecting the Catalog to Your Published Model
The model catalog uses an Analysis Services connection, and is parameterized to make it easy to connect to any published Power BI model.
Note: The Semantic Model parameter can be a comma-separated list of models within the same workspace.

![Parameters dialog](/images/pbitparameters.jpg)

![Parameters dialog](/images/parameters.jpg)

To find your workspace connection, look under Workspace Settings --> License info in the Power BI service.

![Workspace settings](/images/workspacesettings.jpg)

You are connecting to a published Power BI model, so be sure to log in using your Microsoft account.

![Microsoft account login option](/images/microsoftaccount.png)

# Approve Native Database Queries
The model catalog uses DAX queries to retrieve data from a published semantic model. When connecting to a published model for the first time, hit “Run” several times to approve each query.

![Native query dialog](/images/nativequery.jpg)

Alternatively, you can temporarily disable Power BI Desktop's requirement for approvals of native database queries.

![Security option](/images/securityoption.jpg)

# Refreshing a published Model Catalog
The SingleModel version of the Model Catalog will only refresh when a schedule has been set up in the service or it is triggered manually or through the API. When setting up a refresh schedule, use oAuth credentials to connect to the data source (the target published model).
Both of the MultiModel options will not auto refresh (at the current time.)  To refresh them, you must download the file, refresh it locally, and republish.  This is becuase of the way PowerBI validates connections for PowerQuery.
